docs/memory-protections.md, before:

# Memory Protections

## Sections

  - [Kernel Image Lock-down](https://github.com/linux-lock/bpflock/blob/main/docs/memory-protections.md#1-kernel-image-lock-down)
  - [Kernel Modules Protection](https://github.com/linux-lock/bpflock/tree/main/docs/memory-protections.md#2-kernel-modules-protection)
  - [BPF Protection](https://github.com/linux-lock/bpflock/tree/main/docs/memory-protections.md#3-bpf-protection)

## 1. Kernel Image Lock-down

### 1.1 Introduction

`kimglock` - kernel image lock implements restrictions to
prevent both direct and indirect modification to a running
kernel image, attempting to protect against unauthorized access.
It combines the several Linux features including [kernel lockdown](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/kernel_lockdown.7.html) and other LSMs to restrict
unauthorized modification of the kernel image at runtime.

**Note: restrictions and protections are still a moving target, since the Linux kernel offer multiple access entries to modify the running image, it is hard to track all of them, however they will be added as they are discovered.**

kimglock is able to completely block or allow access from the
in the initial [pid namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/pid_namespaces.7.html) only to the following:

  - Loading of unsigned modules.
  - Unsafe usage of module parameters.
  - Access to `/dev/mem, /dev/kmem and /dev/port`.
  - Access to `/dev/efi_test`.
  - kexec of unsigned images.
  - Hibernation of the machine.
  - Direct PCI access.
  - Raw io port access.
  - Raw MSR registers access for x86.
  - Modification of ACPI tables.
  - Direct PCMCIA CIS storage.
  - Reconfiguration of serial port IO.
  - Usage of the ioperm and iopl instructions on x86. 
  - Debugfs access.
  - xmon write access.
  - BPF writes to user RAM.
  - Loading BPF Type Format (BTF) metadata into the kernel.


### 1.2 kimglock usage

`kimglock` supports the following options:

 * `profile`:
    - `allow|none|privileged`: kernel image access is logged and allowed. Default profile.
    - `baseline`: access is allowed only from processes that are in the initial pid namespace. This allows, container manager, systemd and others to properly setup the working environment and communicate with the correspondig hardware.
    - `restricted`: direct and indirect access to a running kernel image is denied for all processes and containers.
 
 * Blocked access:

   Under baseline profile, the kernel image lock-down will be enforced for all processes that are not in the initial pid
   namespace, and [kernel features](https://github.com/linux-lock/bpflock/blob/main/docs/memory-protections.md#1-kernel-image-lock-down) to modify the running kernel are blocked. Special access exceptions can be set to allow some specific operations.

 * Baseline profile access exceptions:
   
   A coma-separated list of allowed features for the rest of all processes that are not in the initial pid namespace can be specified:
   - `unsigned_module` : allow unsigned module loading.
   - `unsafe_module_parameters` : allow module parameters that directly specify hardware
         parameters to drivers 
   - `dev_mem` : access to /dev/{mem,kmem,port} is allowed.
   - `kexec` : kexec of unsigned images is allowed.
   - `hibernation` : hibernation is allowed.
   - `pci_access` : allow direct PCI BAR access.
   - `ioport` : raw io port access is allowed.
   - `msr` : raw msr access is allowed.
   - `mmiotrace` : tracing memory mapped I/O is allowed.
   - `debugfs` : debugfs is allowed.
   - `xmon_rw` : xmon write access is allowed.
   - `bpf_write` : use of bpf write to user RAM is allowed.
   - `btf_load` : loading BPF Type Format (BTF) metadata into the kernel is allowed.


`kimglock` examples:

* Allow profile: kernel image access is allowed.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=none
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=allow
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=privileged
  ```

* Baseline profile: access is allowed only for processes in the initial pid namespace.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=baseline
  ```

* Baseline profile: access is allowed only for processes in the initial pid namespace. Access from all other processes is denied with exceptions to access debugfs, raw I/O port and loading of unsigned modules operations.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=baseline \
    --kimglock-allow=debugfs,ioport,unsigned_module
  ``` 

* Baseline profile: access is allowed only for processes in the initial pid namespace. Access from all other processes is denied with an exception to allow only the bpf writes to user RAM operation.

  ```bash
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=baseline --kimglock-allow=bpf_write
  ``` 

* Restricted profile: direct and indirect access to a running kernel image is denied for all processes.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=restricted
  ```

### 1.3 Disable kimglock

To disable this program delete the directory `/sys/fs/bpf/bpflock/kimglock` and all its pinned content.

If `/sys` is read-only and can not be remounted, then `kimglock` is pinned and continues to run.


## 2 Kernel Modules Protection

### 2.1 Introduction

`kmodlock` implements restrictions to control module load operations on modular kernels. It allows to restrict or block access to:

  - Explicit module loading.
  - Loading of unsigned modules.
  - Automatic loading of kernel modules. This will block users (or attackers) from auto-loading modules. Unprivileged code will not be able to load "vulnerable" modules in this case. 
  - Unsafe usage of module parameters.

`kmodlock` can also be used to ensure that all kernel modules and firmware that are loaded originate from the same root filesystem. Extra flags can be passed to ensure that such filesystem is: mounted read-only or either backed by a read-only device such as dm-verity, if not then the operation will be denied. Some of this functionality was inspired by [LoadPin LSM](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/LSM/LoadPin.html).


### 2.2 Modules protection usage

`kmodlock` supports the following options:

 * `profile`:
   - `allow|none|privileged`: load module operations are allowed. Default value.
   - `baseline`: load and unload modules are allowed only from processes that are in the initial pid namespace. This allows init, systemd or container managers to properly set up the system.
   - `restricted`: all operations of loading modules are denied for all processes on the system.

 * Root filesystem options:
   - `--kmodlock-rootfs`: allow module operations only if the modules originate from the root filesystem.
   - `--kmodlock-ro`: allow module operations only if the root filesystem is mounted read-only.
   - `--kmodlcok-ro-dev`: allow module operations only if the filesystem is backed by a read-only device.

 * In case the profile is `baseline`, a comma-separated list of operations to block can be specified:
   - `load_module`: block module loading.
   - `autoload_module`: block automatic module loading.
   - `unsigned_module` : block unsigned module loading.
   - `unsafe_module_parameters` : block module parameters that directly specify hardware.
         parameters to drivers.

   If the list of operations to block is not set, then all operations are allowed according to the permission model.


Examples:

* Allow profile: loading kernel modules is allowed.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=allow
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=none
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=privileged
  ```

* Baseline profile: module operations are allowed only from processes in the initial pid namespace.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=baseline
  ```

* Baseline profile: module operations are allowed only from processes in the initial pid namespace, but loading unsigned modules is blocked for all.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=baseline --kmodlock-block=unsigned_module
  ```

* Baseline profile: module operations are allowed only from processes in the initial pid namespace, but automatic module loading is blocked for all.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=baseline --kmodlock-block=autoload_module
  ```

* Restriced profile: load modules denied or all processes.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=restricted
  ```

### 2.3 Disable modules protections

For containers workload to disable this program, delete the directory `/sys/fs/bpf/bpflock/kmodlock` and all its pinned content. Re-executing will enable it again.

If `/sys` is read-only and can not be remounted, then bpflock kmodlock is pinned and continues to run.


## 3 BPF protection

### 3.1 Introduction

`bpfrestrict` - implements access restrictions on [bpf syscall](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/bpf.2.html) by
restricting or blocking access to:

  - Loading BPF programs.
  - Creation of BPF maps.
  - Loading BPF Type Format (BTF) metadata into the kernel.
  - BPF writes to user RAM.

Make sure to execute this program last during boot and after all necessary bpf programs have been loaded. The list of blocked operations can be expended in future.

### 3.2 bpfrestrict usage

It supports following options:

 * `profile`:
    - `allow|none|privileged`: bpf is allowed for all processes on the system.
    - `baseline`: bpf is allowed only from processes that are in the initial pid namespace. This allows container managers, systemd, init, etc to properly set up bpf.
    - `restricted`: bpf syscall and all its commands are denied for all processes on the system.

 * Comma-separated list of commands to block in case profile is `baseline`:
    - `bpf_write`: block `bpf_probe_write_user()` that is used to write to user space memory.
    - `btf_load`: block loading BPF Type Format (BTF) metadata into the kernel.
    - `map_create`: block creation of bpf maps.
    - `prog_load`: block loading bpf programs.
    - All other commands are allowed by default.
    
    If the list of commands to block is not set, then all bpf commands are allowed.

Examples:

* Allow profile: BPF access is allowed
  ```bash
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=none
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=allow
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=privileged
  ```

* Baseline profile: BPF access is allowed from processes in the initial pid namespace.
  ```bash
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=baseline
  ```

* Baseline profile: BPF access is allowed only from processes in the initial pid namespace, but bpf_probe_write_user() helper to write user RAM is blocked for all.
  ```bash
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=baseline --bpfrestrict-block=bpf_write
  ```

* Baseline profile: BPF access is allowed only from processes in the initial pid namespace, but the `btf_load` loading BTF metadata into the kernel is blocked.
  ```bash
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=baseline --bpfrestrict-block=btf_load
  ```

* Restricted profile: deny BPF for all processes.
  ```bash
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=restricted
  ```

### 3.3 Disable bpfrestrict

For containers workload to disable bpfrestrict, delete the directory `/sys/fs/bpf/bpflock/bpfrestrict` and all its pinned content. Re-executing will enable it again.

If `/sys` filesystem is read-only and can not be remounted read-write, then bpflock bpfrestrict is pinned and can't be disabled.

Commit message:

docs: update memory protections doc
Signed-off-by: Djalal Harouni <tixxdz@gmail.com>

docs/memory-protections.md, after:

# Memory Protections

## Sections

  - [Kernel Image Lock-down](https://github.com/linux-lock/bpflock/blob/main/docs/memory-protections.md#1-kernel-image-lock-down)
  - [Kernel Modules Protection](https://github.com/linux-lock/bpflock/tree/main/docs/memory-protections.md#2-kernel-modules-protection)
  - [BPF Protection](https://github.com/linux-lock/bpflock/tree/main/docs/memory-protections.md#3-bpf-protection)

## 1. Kernel Image Lock-down

### 1.1 Introduction

`kimglock` - kernel image lock implements restrictions to
prevent both direct and indirect modification to a running
kernel image, attempting to protect against unauthorized access.
It combines the several Linux features including [kernel lockdown](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/kernel_lockdown.7.html) and other LSMs to restrict
unauthorized modification of the kernel image at runtime.

**Note: restrictions and protections are still a moving target, since the Linux kernel offer multiple access entries to modify the running image, it is hard to track all of them, however they will be added as they are discovered.**

kimglock is able to completely block or allow access from the
in the initial [pid namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/pid_namespaces.7.html) only to the following:

  - Loading of unsigned modules.
  - Unsafe usage of module parameters.
  - Access to `/dev/mem, /dev/kmem and /dev/port`.
  - Access to `/dev/efi_test`.
  - kexec of unsigned images.
  - Hibernation of the machine.
  - Direct PCI access.
  - Raw io port access.
  - Raw MSR registers access for x86.
  - Modification of ACPI tables.
  - Direct PCMCIA CIS storage.
  - Reconfiguration of serial port IO.
  - Usage of the ioperm and iopl instructions on x86. 
  - Debugfs access.
  - xmon write access.
  - BPF writes to user RAM.


### 1.2 kimglock usage

`kimglock` supports the following options:

 * `profile`:
    - `allow|none|privileged`: kernel image access is logged and allowed. Default profile.
    - `baseline`: access is allowed only from processes that are in the initial pid namespace. This allows, container manager, systemd and others to properly setup the working environment and communicate with the correspondig hardware.
    - `restricted`: direct and indirect access to a running kernel image is denied for all processes and containers.
 
 * Blocked access:

   Under baseline profile, the kernel image lock-down will be enforced for all processes that are not in the initial pid
   namespace, and [kernel features](https://github.com/linux-lock/bpflock/blob/main/docs/memory-protections.md#1-kernel-image-lock-down) to modify the running kernel are blocked. Special access exceptions can be set to allow some specific operations.

 * Baseline profile access exceptions:
   
   A coma-separated list of allowed features for the rest of all processes that are not in the initial pid namespace can be specified:
   - `unsigned_module` : allow unsigned module loading.
   - `unsafe_module_parameters` : allow module parameters that directly specify hardware
         parameters to drivers 
   - `dev_mem` : access to /dev/{mem,kmem,port} is allowed.
   - `kexec` : kexec of unsigned images is allowed.
   - `hibernation` : hibernation is allowed.
   - `pci_access` : allow direct PCI BAR access.
   - `ioport` : raw io port access is allowed.
   - `msr` : raw msr access is allowed.
   - `mmiotrace` : tracing memory mapped I/O is allowed.
   - `debugfs` : debugfs is allowed.
   - `xmon_rw` : xmon write access is allowed.
   - `bpf_write` : use of bpf write to user RAM is allowed.
   - `btf_load` : loading BPF Type Format (BTF) metadata into the kernel is allowed.


`kimglock` examples:

* Allow profile: kernel image access is allowed.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=none
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=allow
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=privileged
  ```

* Baseline profile: access is allowed only for processes in the initial pid namespace.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=baseline
  ```

* Baseline profile: access is allowed only for processes in the initial pid namespace. Access from all other processes is denied with exceptions to access debugfs, raw I/O port and loading of unsigned modules operations.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=baseline \
    --kimglock-allow=debugfs,ioport,unsigned_module
  ``` 

* Baseline profile: access is allowed only for processes in the initial pid namespace. Access from all other processes is denied with an exception to allow only the bpf writes to user RAM operation.

  ```bash
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=baseline --kimglock-allow=bpf_write
  ``` 

* Restricted profile: direct and indirect access to a running kernel image is denied for all processes.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kimglock-profile=restricted
  ```

### 1.3 Disable kimglock

To disable this program delete the directory `/sys/fs/bpf/bpflock/kimglock` and all its pinned content.

If `/sys` is read-only and can not be remounted, then `kimglock` is pinned and continues to run.


## 2 Kernel Modules Protection

### 2.1 Introduction

`kmodlock` implements restrictions to control module load operations on modular kernels. It allows to restrict or block access to:

  - Explicit module loading.
  - Loading of unsigned modules.
  - Automatic loading of kernel modules. This will block users (or attackers) from auto-loading modules. Unprivileged code will not be able to load "vulnerable" modules in this case. 
  - Unsafe usage of module parameters.

**Under development:**
`kmodlock` can also be used to ensure that all kernel modules and firmware that are loaded originate from the same root filesystem. Extra flags can be passed to ensure that such filesystem is: mounted read-only or either backed by a read-only device such as dm-verity, if not then the operation will be denied. Some of this functionality was inspired by [LoadPin LSM](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/LSM/LoadPin.html).

### 2.2 Modules protection usage

`kmodlock` supports the following options:

* `profile`: this is the global profile that takes one of the followings:
  - `allow|none|privileged` : they are the same, they define the least secure profile. In this profile access is logged and allowed for all processes. Useful to log security events.
  - `baseline` : restrictive profile where access is denied for all processes, except applications and containers that run in the host pid and network namespaces, or applications that are present in the allow `bpflock_cgroupmap`.
  - `restricted` : heavily restricted profile where access is denied for all processes.

 * In case the profile is `allow` or `baseline`, a comma-separated list of operations to block can be specified:
   - `load_module`: block module loading.
   - `autoload_module`: block automatic module loading.
   - `unsigned_module` : block unsigned module loading.
   - `unsafe_module_parameters` : block module parameters that directly specify hardware.
         parameters to drivers.

   If the list of operations to block is not set, then all operations are allowed according to the permission model.

Examples:

* Allow profile: loading kernel modules is allowed.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=allow
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=none
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=privileged
  ```

* Allow profile: loading kernel modules is allowed, but unsigned modules and automatic modules loading are rejected.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=allow --kmodlock-block=unsigned_module,autoload_module
  ```

* Baseline profile: module operations are allowed only from processes in the initial pid and network namespaces.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=baseline
  ```

* Baseline profile: module operations are allowed only from processes in the initial pid and network namespaces, but loading unsigned modules is blocked for all.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=baseline --kmodlock-block=unsigned_module
  ```

* Baseline profile: module operations are allowed only from processes in the initial pid and network namespaces, but automatic module loading is blocked for all.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=baseline --kmodlock-block=autoload_module
  ```

* Restriced profile: loading modules is denied or all processes.
  ```bash
  bpflock --kmodlock-profile=restricted
  ```

### 2.3 Disable modules protections

For containers workload to disable this program, delete the directory `/sys/fs/bpf/bpflock/kmodlock` and all its pinned content. Re-executing will enable it again.

If `/sys` is read-only and can not be remounted, then bpflock kmodlock is pinned and continues to run.

## 3 BPF protection

### 3.1 Introduction

`bpfrestrict` - implements access restrictions on [bpf syscall](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/bpf.2.html) by
restricting or blocking access to:

  - Loading BPF programs.
  - Creation of BPF maps.
  - Loading BPF Type Format (BTF) metadata into the kernel.
  - BPF writes to user RAM.

Make sure to execute this program last during boot and after all necessary bpf programs have been loaded. The list of blocked operations can be expended in future.

### 3.2 bpfrestrict usage

It supports following options:

* `profile`: this is the global profile that takes one of the followings:
  - `allow|none|privileged` : they are the same, they define the least secure profile. In this profile access is logged and allowed for all processes. Useful to log security events.
  - `baseline` : restrictive profile where access is denied for all processes, except applications and containers that run in the host pid and network namespaces, or applications that are present in the allow `bpflock_cgroupmap`.
  - `restricted` : heavily restricted profile where access is denied for all processes.

 * Comma-separated list of commands to block in case profile is `allow` or `baseline`:
    - `bpf_write`: block `bpf_probe_write_user()` that is used to write to user space memory.
    - `btf_load`: block loading BPF Type Format (BTF) metadata into the kernel.
    - `map_create`: block creation of bpf maps.
    - `prog_load`: block loading bpf programs.
    - All other commands are allowed by default.
    
    If the list of commands to block is not set, then all bpf commands are allowed.

Examples:

* Allow profile: BPF access is allowed
  ```bash
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=none
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=allow
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=privileged
  ```

* Allow profile: BPF access is allowed but bpf write to user space memory is blocked for all.
  ```bash
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=allow --bpfrestrict-block=bpf_write
  ``` 

* Baseline profile: BPF access is allowed from processes in the initial pid and network namespaces.
  ```bash
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=baseline
  ```

* Baseline profile: BPF access is allowed only from processes in the initial pid and network namespaces, but bpf_probe_write_user() helper to write user RAM is blocked for all.
  ```bash
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=baseline --bpfrestrict-block=bpf_write
  ```

* Baseline profile: BPF access is allowed only from processes in the initial pid and network namespaces, but the `btf_load` loading BTF metadata into the kernel is blocked for all.
  ```bash
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=baseline --bpfrestrict-block=btf_load
  ```

* Restricted profile: deny BPF for all processes.
  ```bash
  bpflock --bpfrestrict-profile=restricted
  ```

### 3.3 Disable bpfrestrict

For containers workload to disable bpfrestrict, delete the directory `/sys/fs/bpf/bpflock/bpfrestrict` and all its pinned content. Re-executing will enable it again.

If `/sys` filesystem is read-only and can not be remounted read-write, then bpflock bpfrestrict is pinned and can't be disabled.
